docs: :memo: decision post on a data processing tool (#145)
seedcase-project/decisions: why-polars-for-data-cleaning/index.qmd

---
title: "Why use Polars for data cleaning?"

> description: "Key to all data storage is good data quality. This is often overlooked as it can be labour intensive, but it is essential for good data analysis. This post explains why we chose to use Polars for data cleaning."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
description: "The key to useful and meaningful data is data that is good quality and tidy. Getting data to be tidy and higher quality is an often undervalued and underestimated activity, at the same time being very labour intensive. But it is essential to have higher quality and tidier data to have better quality results from the analysis. This post explains why we chose to use Polars for data cleaning and processing tasks."
```

date: "2024-12-04"
categories:
- data cleaning
- pre-processing data
---

::: content-hidden
Use other decision posts as inspiration to writing these. Leave the
content-hidden sections in the text for future reference.
:::

## Context and problem statement

::: content-hidden
State the context and some background on the issue, then write a
statement in the form of a question for the problem.
:::

When working with data analysis, data is rarely ready to be used 'as
is'. There will always be things that are either very wrong (like text

> in what should be a number field), or slightly wrong (like a single
> missing value, or an outlier, which may or may not be a data entry
> error). In Sprout we are not worried about the single missing values or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in what should be a number field), slightly wrong (like a single
missing or incorrect value), or an outlier potentially due to an error in data entry. 
Since we don't have domain knowledge to know about missing values or
```

> the outliers, but we are concerned with the data that contradicts the
> definition of the resource (eg. TBC in a date field). There are a lot of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the definition or meaning of an outlier. But there are some basic things we can
check and fix, such as whether the data contradicts any constraints in the
definition of the data resource (eg. a number in a date field). There are a lot of
```

Miminize use of abbreviations. I didn't know what TBC meant.

tools that can be used to both analyse a data set, and to clean it,
either as part of the analysis, or as part of the initial check before

> the data is transformed and stored. The checking of the data prior to
> inclusion into Sprout is done within Sprout itself, this work will
> result in a list of errors which the user will need to handle before
> they can load the data into Sprout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the data is transformed and stored. So, our question is:
```

This information isn't relevant for this decision post.

> > Which tool should we use for cleaning and processing data before
> > loading it into Sprout?
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Which tool should we use for cleaning and processing data in our software 
and what tool should we recommend users to use when cleaning and processing
needs to happen outside of our software?*

```

## Decision drivers

::: content-hidden
List some reasons for why we need to make this decision and what things
have arisen that impact work.
:::

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

- Can be installed and used in Python.
- Is designed and built to be fast for processing data.
- Has minimal dependencies, so can be installed quickly.
- Is flexible to reading different data storage formats (e.g. SQL databases, Parquet, CSV).
- Can write to different storage formats (as with above).
```

Some other requirements we need.

-   We need a tool that can clean data and is easy to integrate with our

>     current workflow.

Reviewer: Could you expand on this? What do you mean by "integrate with our workflow"?

Author: We are building things in python, so if we expect our users to know a language it would be python and not for instance R. So it needs to be easy for us to pick up and use. I think is how I was thinking of it. I'd be happy to take that bit out.

Reviewer: No need to take it out, just make it clearer by adding what you wrote here! 😁 That it needs to have a Python package available.

> -   We want to use an established tool that is well supported.
> -   We want a tool which users will find easy to learn and use.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

These are already part of our principles (https://design.seedcase-project.org/software/principles) so we don't need to repeat them here. All tools must follow those principles.

-   We do not want to build a tool from scratch.

## Considered options

::: content-hidden
List and describe some of the options, as well as some of the benefits
and drawbacks for each option.
:::

> There are a number of tools available to use for data cleaning, but as
> we want something which will run in python, and which is well supported,
> we have narrowed our options down to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While there are a number of tools available to use for data cleaning, given our requirements,
these are the options we've considered:
```

-   [DuckDB](https://www.duckdb.org/)
-   [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/)
-   [Polars](https://pola.rs/)

### DuckDB

DuckDB is as the name implies not a Python library, but an in-process

> OLAP database solution. It is a very young tool, version 1.0.0 was

Reviewer: ```suggestion
online analytical process (OLAP) database tool that has API extensions in many languages including Python. It is a very young tool, version 1.0.0 was
```

released in 2024, although the first version was released in 2019. The
developers have set it up as a not-for-profit foundation in the
Netherlands.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Although a very young project it is already in use by a number of
    large companies and has a large community of users.
    -   The code is open source, and the way it has been set up is
        promising for it to remain that way.

> -   It is very fast, and can handle large data sets.

Reviewer: Any comments on how the code looks, it's ease of use, etc?

:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   It is not designed to be used as a data cleaning tool, but as a

>     database.

Reviewer: I don't understand this comment. SQL is a language that does lots of data cleaning.

Author: It's more that it isn't the main focus of the tool, data cleaning is of course something sql is designed to also do, but the main purpose of a database is to take data in and store it.

Reviewer: DuckDB is an in memory SQL tool, it doesn't store it in a database on the hard drive. Only acts like it does in memory 😊

Reviewer: Or rather, it is used for it's in memory abilities. It can of course write to a file, and read from it.

:::
:::

### Polars

The Polars project started in 2020 and is based in the Netherlands.

> Relatively small team but seems to have a fast growing user base, and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They have a relatively small team but seem to have a fast growing user base, and
```

very enthusiastic developers. Polars is written in Rust and available

> for Python. It is designed to be faster than Pandas, and to handle all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for Python. Because it is written in Rust (which is a low level language), it is very fast, and can handle all
```

common data formats. The two main developers are described as

> enthusiastic about open source, which makes it a potentially good choice
> for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
enthusiastic about open source.
```

Comments about decisions should be before the conclusion/decision section.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Enthusiastic user community, with a lot of support available.
-   Supports several languages, including Python.
-   Handles all common data formats.

> -   Faster than Pandas.

Reviewer: And comments on the syntax, documentation, etc?

:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   Relatively young project, so may not have all the features of more
    established tools.

> -   Not as well known as Pandas, but certainly getting there.
> -   Compared with Pandas there aren't as many online courses available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Because it is still new, it isn't as widely used and doesn't have too many learning resources available yet.
```

Avoid comparing to other tools within the benefits and drawbacks. These are about comparisons with our needs.

:::
:::

### Pandas

Pandas was initially released in 2008, and is now a well established
tool to work with data frames in Python. The tool is well supported, and
has a large user base. It is also well documented, and there are a lot
of online courses available for users to learn how to use it. The tool
is written in Python, and is designed to be easy to use, and to work
with large data sets. The main critique is that it can be slow when

> working with large data sets.

Reviewer: Most of these comments should go into the benefits and drawbacks sections.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Established tool with a large user base.
-   Well supported, and well documented.

> -   Works with all relevant languages and data formats.

Reviewer: Comments about the syntax and how easy the documentation is to navigate?

Author: Don't think I'm at a point where I can judge the syntax, but I've added tutorials and documentation.

:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   Can be slow when working with large data sets.

> -   May see itself overtaken by newer tools in future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This isn't really relevant to our needs.

:::
:::

## Decision outcome

::: content-hidden
What decision was made, use the form "We decided on CHOICE because of
REASONS."
:::

> We have decided to use Polars for data cleaning, as it is a fast and well documented, and we expect that we may use it elsewhere in the project. It is also a relatively new tool, but it is already well supported with an enthusiastic following, which we expect will continue in future. Our second choice would be Pandas, not because DuckDB isn't a good tool (we may use it elsewhere in the project), but because it is not designed to be used as a data cleaning tool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have decided to use Polars for data cleaning, as it is a fast and well documented, and we expect that we may use it elsewhere in the project. It is also a relatively new tool, but it is already well supported with an enthusiastic following, which we expect will continue in future.
```

This second part of the paragraph isn't necessary, nor completely true (see comment above about DuckDB and data cleaning).

---
title: "Why Polars"
description: "The key to useful and meaningful data is data that is good quality and tidy. Getting data to be tidy and higher quality is an often undervalued and underestimated activity, at the same time being very labour intensive. But it is essential to have higher quality and tidier data to have better quality results from the analysis. This post explains why we chose to use Polars for data processing tasks."
date: "2024-12-04"
categories:
- data processing
---

::: content-hidden
Use other decision posts as inspiration to writing these. Leave the
content-hidden sections in the text for future reference.
:::

## Context and problem statement

::: content-hidden
State the context and some background on the issue, then write a
statement in the form of a question for the problem.
:::

When working with data analysis, data is rarely ready to be used 'as
is'. There will always be things that are either very wrong (like text
in what should be a number field), slightly wrong (like a single missing
or incorrect value), needing to be rearranged or reorganized, or an outlier potentially due to an error in data

> entry. Since we don't have domain knowledge to know about missing values
> or the definition or meaning of an outlier. But there are some basic

Reviewer: ```suggestion
entry. While we don't have domain knowledge to know about missing values
or the definition or meaning of an outlier, there are some basic
```

        promising for it to remain that way.
-   It is very fast, and can handle large data sets.
-   Extensive documentation with user guide sections embedded.
:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   To use it to its full potential in Python, users need to have some knowledge
    of SQL.
:::
:::

### Polars

The Polars project started in 2020 and is based in the Netherlands. They
have a relatively small team but seem to have a fast growing user base,
and very enthusiastic developers. Polars is written in Rust and
available for Python. The two main developers are described as enthusiastic about
open source.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Enthusiastic user community, with a lot of support available.
-   Supports several languages, including Python.
-   Handles all common data formats.
-   Written in Rust (a very fast, low level language), so it processes data very fast.
-   Polars has an extensive user guide section.
:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   Relatively young project, so may not have all the features of more
    established tools.
-   Because it is still new, it isn't as widely used and doesn't have
    too many learning resources available yet.

> -   No traditional documentation section, everything is in the user
>     guide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Hmm, based on your comment, I wouldn't suggest putting this under the drawbacks since the documentation is there on the navbar. As the text is now, it reads as if we couldn't find the documentation.

:::
:::

### Pandas

Pandas was initially released in 2008, and is now a well established
tool to work with data frames in Python. The tool is written in Python,
and is designed to be easy to use.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Established tool with a large user base.
-   Well supported, and well documented.
-   Plenty of learning resources available from a variety of sources.
-   Works with all relevant languages and data formats.
-   The Pandas website contains a very thorough section on how to get
    started, including customised tutorials for people that have
    experience with many other tools.
-   The documentation seems very thorough, and includes a lot of
    examples.
:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   Can be slow when working with large data sets.
-   Because it was developed more than a decade ago, some of it's syntax and design is out-dated.
:::
:::

## Decision outcome

::: content-hidden
What decision was made, use the form "We decided on CHOICE because of
REASONS."
:::

> We have decided to use Polars for data processing, as it is a fast and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have decided to use Polars for data processing, as it is fast and
```

---

> title: "Why use Polars for data cleaning?"
> description: "The key to useful and meaningful data is data that is good quality and tidy. Getting data to be tidy and higher quality is an often undervalued and underestimated activity, at the same time being very labour intensive. But it is essential to have higher quality and tidier data to have better quality results from the analysis. This post explains why we chose to use Polars for data cleaning and processing tasks."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: "Why Polars"
description: "The key to useful and meaningful data is data that is good quality and tidy. Getting data to be tidy and higher quality is an often undervalued and underestimated activity, at the same time being very labour intensive. But it is essential to have higher quality and tidier data to have better quality results from the analysis. This post explains why we chose to use Polars for data processing tasks."
```

I realized from our meeting and discussion that there is some miscommunication and misunderstanding about the tool, and I think it stems from the word "cleaning". So instead, I'm changing everything to reference "processing" rather than "clean" and hopefully that will help align understandings :relaxed:

date: "2024-12-04"
categories:

> - data cleaning
> - pre-processing data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- data processing
```

---

::: content-hidden
Use other decision posts as inspiration to writing these. Leave the
content-hidden sections in the text for future reference.
:::

## Context and problem statement

::: content-hidden
State the context and some background on the issue, then write a
statement in the form of a question for the problem.
:::

When working with data analysis, data is rarely ready to be used 'as
is'. There will always be things that are either very wrong (like text
in what should be a number field), slightly wrong (like a single missing

> or incorrect value), or an outlier potentially due to an error in data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
or incorrect value), needing to be rearranged or reorganized, or an outlier potentially due to an error in data
```

entry. Since we don't have domain knowledge to know about missing values
or the definition or meaning of an outlier. But there are some basic
things we can check and fix, such as whether the data contradicts any
constraints in the definition of the data resource (eg. a number in a

> date field). There are a lot of tools that can be used to both analyse a
> data set, and to clean it, either as part of the analysis, or as part of
> the initial check before the data is transformed and stored. So, our
> question is:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date field). There are a lot of tools that can process data so, our
question is:
```

> *Which tool should we use for cleaning and processing data in our
> software and what tool should we recommend users to use when cleaning
> and processing needs to happen outside of our software?*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Which tool should we use for processing data in our
software and what tool should we recommend users to use when
processing needs to happen outside of our software?*
```

## Decision drivers

::: content-hidden
List some reasons for why we need to make this decision and what things
have arisen that impact work.
:::

-   Can be installed and used in Python.
-   Is designed and built to be fast for processing data.
-   Has minimal dependencies, so can be installed quickly.
-   Is flexible to reading different data storage formats (e.g. SQL
    databases, Parquet, CSV).
-   Can write to different storage formats (as with above).

> -   We need a tool that can clean data and is either written in Python
>     or has a Python package available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I guess the re-wording now is nearly a duplicate of the first item and the third item, so can be removed now.

## Considered options

::: content-hidden
List and describe some of the options, as well as some of the benefits
and drawbacks for each option.
:::

> While there are a number of tools available to use for data cleaning,
> given our requirements, these are the options we've considered:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to our requirements defined by our [principles](https://design.seedcase-project.org/software/principles) and our requirements listed above, these are the options we've considered:
```

-   [DuckDB](https://www.duckdb.org/)
-   [Pandas](https://pandas.pydata.org/)
-   [Polars](https://pola.rs/)

### DuckDB

DuckDB is an in-process online analytical process (OLAP) database tool
that has API extensions in many languages including Python. It is a very
young tool, version 1.0.0 was released in 2024, although the first
version was released in 2019. The developers have set it up as a
not-for-profit foundation in the Netherlands.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Although a very young project it is already in use by a number of
    large companies and has a large community of users.
    -   The code is open source, and the way it has been set up is
        promising for it to remain that way.
-   It is very fast, and can handle large data sets.

> -   It is designed for data cleaning using SQL syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think this is mainly it's drawback, that in the Python package, you need to write SQL syntax rather than Python syntax.

-   Extensive documentation with user guide sections embedded.
:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

> -   It is not designed exclusively to be used as a data cleaning tool,
>     this is more of an add-on on the way to storing data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Given that DuckDB doesn't store data in any specific format and instead imports from other formats (see https://duckdb.org/docs/data/data_sources), this isn't true. Combined with changing the terminology to processing rather than cleaning, I hope this makes more sense and that we can remove this drawback.

> -   To use it to its full potential, users need to have some knowledge
>     of SQL.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   To use it to its full potential in Python, users need to have some knowledge
    of SQL.
```

In R, you can actually write R code and internally it gets converted to SQL. But looks like the Python package can't do that. So this is actually a pretty big drawback.

:::
:::

### Polars

The Polars project started in 2020 and is based in the Netherlands. They
have a relatively small team but seem to have a fast growing user base,
and very enthusiastic developers. Polars is written in Rust and

> available for Python. Because it is written in Rust (which is a low
> level language), it is very fast, and can handle all common data
> formats. The two main developers are described as enthusiastic about

Reviewer: ```suggestion
available for Python. The two main developers are described as enthusiastic about
```

Since these are benefits, they should be in benefits not in the intro paragraph.

open source.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Enthusiastic user community, with a lot of support available.
-   Supports several languages, including Python.
-   Handles all common data formats.

> -   Faster than Pandas.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Written in Rust (a very fast, low level language), so it processes data very fast.
```

> -   Polars have an extensive user guide section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Polars has an extensive user guide section.
```

:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

-   Relatively young project, so may not have all the features of more
    established tools.
-   Because it is still new, it isn't as widely used and doesn't have
    too many learning resources available yet.
-   No traditional documentation section, everything is in the user

>     guide.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what you mean here by "traditional documentation". Can you expand?

Author: There isn't a header on the website saying Documentation, you have to dig into the User Guides to find it. I may just have been lucky, but I feel that almost all the tools I've had a look at have had a section called something like Documentation.

:::
:::

### Pandas

Pandas was initially released in 2008, and is now a well established
tool to work with data frames in Python. The tool is written in Python,
and is designed to be easy to use.

::: columns
::: column
#### Benefits

-   Established tool with a large user base.
-   Well supported, and well documented.
-   Plenty of learning resources available from a variety of sources.
-   Works with all relevant languages and data formats.

> -   The pandas website contains a very thorough section on how to get

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The Pandas website contains a very thorough section on how to get
```

    started, including customised tutorials for people that have
    experience with many other tools.

> -   The documentation seem very thorough, and includes a lot of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   The documentation seems very thorough, and includes a lot of
```

    examples.
:::

::: column
#### Drawbacks

> -   Can be slow when working with large data sets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Can be slow when working with large data sets.
-   Because it was developed more than a decade ago, some of it's syntax and design is out-dated.
```

:::
:::

## Decision outcome

::: content-hidden
What decision was made, use the form "We decided on CHOICE because of
REASONS."
:::

> We have decided to use Polars for data cleaning, as it is a fast and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have decided to use Polars for data processing, as it is a fast and
```

well documented, and we expect that we may use it elsewhere in the
project. It is also a relatively new tool, but it is already well
supported with an enthusiastic following, which we expect will continue
in future.

### Consequences

::: content-hidden
List some potential consequences of this decision.
:::

We don't expect that we will find any problems with this decision down
the line, but as always it is something that we will review on a regular
basis. If we find that Polars is not meeting our needs, we will look at
other tools that are available.

## Resources used for this post

::: content-hidden
List the resources used to write this post
:::

> -   [DuckDB wikipage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DuckDB)
> 
> -   [DuckBD website](https://www.duckdb.org/)
> 
> -   [Pandas wikipage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pandas_(software))
> 
> -   [Pandas website](https://pandas.pydata.org/)
> 
> -   [Polars website](https://pola.rs/)
> 
> -   [DuckDB study](https://github.com/prrao87/duckdb-study) speed
>     comparison between DuckDB, Pandas and Polars.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   [DuckDB wikipage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/DuckDB)
-   [DuckBD website](https://www.duckdb.org/)
-   [Pandas wikipage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pandas_(software))
-   [Pandas website](https://pandas.pydata.org/)
-   [Polars website](https://pola.rs/)
-   [DuckDB study](https://github.com/prrao87/duckdb-study) speed
    comparison between DuckDB, Pandas and Polars.
```

Just to remove empty lines between.
